This video will be a nice combination of topics you learned a couple of sections ago, along with some
new material from this section.
I will give you a reminder of RSA representational similarity analysis, and also calculating a selectivity
index that tells us about how much the coordinated activations across different neurons in the attention
sublayer is similar with in a semantic category versus across different semantic categories.
I will also introduce a slightly different experimental approach compared to what we've done before,
in terms of matching different token sequences for activations.
For example, in the previous couple of videos, we looked at activation for identical tokens that had
different preceding contexts.
Now here in this video we're going to flip that around.
We will have identical context in terms of the recent history of tokens and different target tokens
for the analyses.
Here is a reminder of an overview of the representational similarity analysis.
This is a slide that I showed several sections ago about comparing token embeddings from different tokenizers.
Now in that example, the idea was that the embeddings dimensionalities might differ, for example,
between GPT and Bert.
So we cannot directly compare the vectors, but we can calculate cosine similarity or any other measure
of similarity within each tokenizer, and then see if the ways that the different embeddings vectors
relate to each other is similar across the different tokenizers.
Now here in this video and also in the code challenge in the next video, the embeddings dimensionality
will actually be exactly the same.
But we're going to get the data matrices from different attention matrices for example Q versus k.
So queries versus keys.
Now the thing is that the embeddings dimensionalities are the same, but the vectors themselves don't
really line up with each other.
So that is to say vector 37 in the queries matrix does not correspond to vector 37 in the keys matrix.
Now we could do other things.
We can organize these by attention head, which we will get to later on in the course in the next section.
But anyway, what we're going to do here in this video is calculate cosine similarity for lots of different
tokens within the queries vectors.
And then again within the keys vectors, and then see if the ways that the token embeddings are processed
relative to each other is comparable between the the queries and the keys vectors, and that will be
the basis for the RSA here.
Now the tokens that we're going to be using here will come from three different semantic categories.
And so that will also allow us to look for category selectivity.
Now here in this video I'm only going to use the Q and the k matrices and only from one layer in a model.
But the analyses and the code that I will show you in this video, you will get to extend and expand
in the code challenge in the next video.
So here's what I'm going to do in the Python demo.
I'll work with GPT two medium and hook all of the Q and K activations.
I have a bunch of target words that are organized into three categories, and you can already see the
semantic categories are something about outer space, something about furniture and interior architecture,
and different kinds of fruit.
All of these words are single token words, and I will put them at the end of a short sentence, which
I will then feed into the GPT language model.
After extracting the activations from one layer, I will calculate the cosine similarities for each
of the tokens across all of the Q vectors and across all of the k vectors.
You can see that the cosine similarity is overall quite strong from the color bars here.
And in this histogram of all the values, I didn't even plot any values below like 0.55 five or whatever.
So the case similarities are considerably stronger than the similarities.
Now, that might seem strange at first, but when you see that all of the tokens preceding the target
tokens are identical for every target token and every sequence, then this actually does make sense,
because the k vectors are representing the context to match with the q vectors, and the q is what's
unique to each sentence.
So it's also interesting to look at the similarity matrices.
You can kind of see that there's three clusters forming for the three different semantic categories,
although it's actually not so super obvious that there are three groups.
And so the selectivity index is actually just a little bit above one.
And it's a little bit higher for the Q matrix than for the k matrix, which you can kind of visually
intuit from this plot.
Now, to be honest, I was expecting the Q selectivity to be a little bit stronger, but the weak K
selectivity is not so surprising to me, considering that all the tokens before the target word are
identical.
Anyway, the RSA in this case is really strong, so this indicates that the way the tokens are processed
relative to each other is really, really similar in the Q and k matrices.
Now this result here is the result of pooling over all three semantic categories.
And I'll show you that the results are equally strong within each category.
Although the sample sizes are smaller of course.
Now all of these analyses in this video are just done in one layer, so you might wonder whether the
findings are consistent across lots of different layers.
So different transformer blocks.
That's a great question.
And it's something that you will get to evaluate in the next video.
But for now let's switch to code and have a look.
Import some libraries and the GPT two medium.
So bigger than small.
Uh let's see.
Of course always switching into eval mode here.
Here's where I define the hooks.
So I get the output of attention dot c attention.
So this is the linear transformation of the embeddings vectors.
The token plus position embedding vectors through the wq, w, k and w weights matrices.
But immediately before they go through the attention algorithm.
And that's what I get here.
So output.
And then I'm detaching from the computational graph to ignore all of the gradient information which
we don't want anyway.
And then dot split.
You've seen this method before splitting according to the embedding dimension on the final dimension
of this tensor.
Now that gives me the qq and V matrices, although for this video I'm only storing q and k, so v gets
lost into the ether.
Don't worry though, we will come back to it in the next in the code challenge in the next video.
Okay.
And then also I'm numpy ifying it.
I'm pretty sure that I have decided that that is a valid English word.
So, uh, transforming them from PyTorch to numpy just because later in the code I will find it easier
to work with numpy.
Okay, and now I'm only implanting one hook in layer five.
Of course, you are welcome to explore other layers and in the next code challenge this is going to
be um, a for loop where you'll, you'll get to implant these hooks into all the layers.
Okay.
So here you can see all of the target words.
So I put them in three lines.
It's all one list.
But for visual clarification I have organized them into three rows of code here.
Yeah.
So things about outer space, things about interior design and things about fruits.
And then yeah, this is just confirming that these are all single token words.
Now the thing is there's no spaces before this, right?
So it is possible that a lot of these words are actually represented by more than one token without
a space.
But when you put in a space, then they end up being single token words.
So that's why I have this thing here.
The next word is and then whatever is the target word.
And in that case we get that this is you know, all of these words are represented by single tokens.
Okay.
Here I'm going to create a mask based on the word and the category.
So these first words.
So all of these words up here are in category space.
But here I'm labeling it category one and then category two and category three.
Now the uh sample sizes are not perfectly matched.
You can already see that looking here.
So there are more furniture words than there are, uh, fruit words.
And there are more fruit words than there are outer space words.
That's partly because I was a little bit lazy to find all of these words.
And also partly, yeah, this kind of research, it is ideal to have, uh, equal sample sizes.
And when possible, you should strive for equal sample sizes.
But it's not strictly necessary as long as the sample sizes are roughly comparable.
Uh, it's not a big deal if you would have, for example, uh, let's say like this one word in this
category compared to, you know, 500 words in this other category that is really not statistically
appropriate.
But, you know, if the sample size is off by one or 2 or 3, that's not a big deal.
Okay.
Anyway, this kind of mask you have seen before.
This is what will allow me to isolate and separate the different activations and the cosine similarities
related to the words themselves.
So the within category terms and the cross category terms.
And I have also mentioned this before when I first introduced this.
But just keep in mind that this is kind of a clever trick for identifying within versus cross category
items, but it only works for a relatively small number of groups.
This sort of approach does not arbitrarily scale to a much larger number of distinct groups.
For example, Imagine we had 12 different semantic categories.
Then you would be able to get to the number 12, as you know, one times 12 and three times four and
two times six.
So this approach only works for a relatively small number of categories.
But when it does work, then it's great.
Okay, so here I'm creating the batches.
And the sentence.
The sequence that I'm giving to the model is the following.
The next word is and then it's the target word.
So that is kind of boring in terms of what it actually means in language.
But it is interesting from an experimental approach, because it means that literally every single sequence
in this batch has identical context.
So all of the tokens are exactly identical.
So therefore any kind of causal processing in the model should be exactly identical up until the very
last token, where we get all unique words organized into three different semantic categories.
So it's a pretty nice experimental technique.
Okay, here is where I'm pushing all of the data through the model.
So this one batch through the model you can see I'm not using the GPU here.
You could if you want to.
I think it's not necessary.
That took three seconds on the CPU.
There are a lot of batches but are a lot of sequences.
Excuse me, but each sequence is so short that it really just doesn't take the model a whole lot of
time to run through this.
So here I can just confirm that I get two keys in this dictionary for attention layer five and then
matrix Q and matrix k.
And then this is the size.
There are 34 sequences corresponding to 34 target words, five tokens in each sequence, and the thousand
24 is the embeddings dimensionality of GPT two medium.
Now that we have all of the data, we can proceed with the analysis.
So here I will calculate all of the cosine similarities.
I'm extracting all of the activations from q here and k here.
And you can see this is all of the sequences in the batch.
So all batches the final token and all of the dimensions.
So all of the neurons in Q and in k.
Once I have those I can proceed with calculating the cosine similarity, as you've seen many times before.
And also as I've stressed before, if you prefer to calculate this using scikit learn or PyTorch, that's
great.
You do not need to do everything manually, but it is a good idea to check the results and the sizes
of the results because, for example, I could do it like this.
And now this is also a perfectly valid cosine similarity matrix.
But this is now calculating the cosine similarity along the other dimensions.
So now we're going to get cosine similarity across the different q vectors and not across the different
tokens.
Both are fine.
And you know we use both in this course.
Okay.
So then run all of that.
And then we create these histograms which you saw in the slides.
Now when you look at this you know a priori that there are three semantic categories.
So what you want to look for here is whether you see three blocks in this matrix.
So you do see the blocks.
It looks like, you know, there's a couple of items that are even more strongly correlated with each
other or have stronger cosine similarity compared to the other ones, and you also get a lot of interesting
cross terms.
For example, here, this is the word orange, and this is actually the word sun.
It's labeled up here, but sun and orange have a strong cosine similarity.
That's this data point over here.
Not surprising, but it is kind of interesting because the word orange can indicate the fruit and also
the color.
Okay.
So then I take all of the unique elements in this cosine similarity matrix.
That's what I do here.
So all of the unique elements are above the diagonal.
And then I make histograms of those for q and k.
And that is what you see plotted over here.
As I mentioned in the slides the k cosine similarities are generally much higher than q, although q
is also quite strong.
And you see that in these numerical values over here in the, uh, the color bars.
And again, that makes sense because k is all about the context, which is exactly the same in every
single sentence.
Okay.
So now what I'm going to do is calculate the selectivity index.
And the selectivity index as a reminder is the average of these.
So within category cosine similarities plus the average of these plus the average of these.
And then the average of those three.
And that's the numerator.
And the denominator is the average of all of the cross category cosine similarities which is all of
these guys out here.
Yeah.
It's not really so obvious that it's going to be higher for Q compared to K.
I was expecting it to be a little bit more visually differentiated.
So a little bit less of the cross terms here, but perhaps that's because the sentences are quite short
and they don't really have a lot of meaning.
Right?
These are not like deeply meaningful sentences that I'm giving to GPT to process.
Anyway, uh, that ends up being just a hair above one for Q and also for K.
Now is this significantly greater than one?
That is something we cannot say here.
Uh, you would have to do a full analysis with some, uh, shuffling to generate a null hypothesis distribution
to see if this is statistically significantly greater than one.
Uh, I'm not going to go into that here.
Anyway, uh, what I am going to go into is the representational similarity analysis.
Also, as you remember from earlier in the course, once you've done all the hard work to get to the
RSA, the RSA itself is fairly straightforward.
All you have to do is get the upper triangle so all of these unique elements and correlate them with
these unique elements.
And that's what I do here.
So here I extract the unique elements.
And here I correlate them and then plot them.
And you see that those are not identical but really really really similar.
And so what does this tell us.
This tells us that although the q and the k so the query and the keys matrices are doing different things,
they have different weights.
They're calculating different results about the token embeddings vectors.
But the way that they represent the relationships between the different words is really similar.
Okay.
And then this is collapsing across all of the words.
What I do here is separate for the different categories.
So I'm looping over the categories, and now I'm just getting the, uh, only those categories from
the group mask.
And then you see that it's still basically the same.
The sample size is smaller, but that's fine.
The relationships are really clear.
The RSA correlations are super duper strong.
A lot of the analyses that I'm teaching you in this course are quite versatile.
They can be used in lots of different ways with different applications, and there are also lots of
ways to adapt and tweak the analyses for particular hypotheses, experiment designs and investigations.
And I have to say, that's one thing I really like about teaching analysis methods in statistics and
data science and machine learning, because theories and interpretations change over time.
But once a good method is introduced to the literature, it continues to be useful for a long time in
many different use cases.